README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <img src="logo-header.svg" alt="RustDesk - Your remote desktop"><br>
  <a href="#free-public-servers">Servers</a> •
  <a href="#raw-steps-to-build">Build</a> •
  <a href="#how-to-build-with-docker">Docker</a> •
  <a href="#file-structure">Structure</a> •
  <a href="#snapshot">Snapshot</a><br>
  [<a href="README-ZH.md">中文</a>] | [<a href="README-ES.md">Español</a>] | [<a href="README-FR.md">Français</a>] | [<a href="README-DE.md">Deutsch</a>] | [<a href="README-PL.md">Polski</a>] | [<a href="README-FI.md">Suomi</a>] | [<a href="README-ML.md">മലയാളം</a>] | [<a href="README-JP.md">日本語</a>] | [<a href="README-NL.md">Nederlands</a>] | [<a href="README-IT.md">Italiano</a>] | [<a href="README-RU.md">Русский</a>] | [<a href="README-PTBR.md">Português (Brasil)</a>] | [<a href="README-EO.md">Esperanto</a>]<br>
  <b>We need your help to translate this README and <a href="https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/lang">RustDesk UI</a> to your native language</b>
</p>

Chat with us: [Discord](https://discord.gg/nDceKgxnkV) | [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/rustdesk)

[![ko-fi](https://ko-fi.com/img/githubbutton_sm.svg)](https://ko-fi.com/I2I04VU09)

Yet another remote desktop software, written in Rust. Works out of the box, no configuration required. You have full control of your data, with no concerns about security. You can use our rendezvous/relay server, [set up your own](https://rustdesk.com/server), or [write your own rendezvous/relay server](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk-server-demo).

RustDesk welcomes contribution from everyone. See [`CONTRIBUTING.md`](CONTRIBUTING.md) for help getting started.

[**BINARY DOWNLOAD**](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/releases)

## UI-inline Build

Currently, when using `cargo build` to create a binary of RustDesk, the `\src\ui\` folder must be in the same directory as the `rustdesk.exe` file.

Needed the feature packing `ui` folder into binary executable.
The `inline` feature was implemented originally.
The following is a way to build under inline mode.

1. Apply [these changes](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/pull/240). They were applied to `packui` branch of this repo already.
2. Download [sciter-sdk](https://github.com/c-smile/sciter-sdk.git) and append `bin` directory (one of `bin.win`, `bin.osx` or `bin.lnx`) to `PATH` environment variable. That directory contains `packfolder` executable.
3. Run this file: `src/makerc.bat`. All html/css/tis files will be packed into `src/resources.rc` file.
4. In case of MacOS:
  - Run `cargo install cargo-bundle` to install `cargo bundle`.
  - Fix some paths in build.py.
`libsciter.dylib` -> `src/libsciter.dylib`
`libsciter-gtk.so` -> `src/libsciter-gtk.so`
  - Run `brew install create-dmg`.
  - Add output filename to create-dmg parameters in `build.py`.
`os.system('create-dmg target/release/bundle/osx/RustDesk.app')` -> `os.system('create-dmg "RustDesk %s.dmg" target/release/bundle/osx/RustDesk.app'%version)`
8. Install python3 and run this command in project root directory: `python3 build.py`
9. In case of Windows:
  - The `RustsDesk.exe` will be built in `target/release` and it will be duplicated to `rustdesk-1.1.9-putes.exe` in root directory.
  - These files have its own icon, unlike debug executable.
10. In case of MacOS:
  - The `rustsdesk` executable will be built in `target/release` and `rustdesk-1.1.9.dmg` will be created in root directory.

Gathered all these commands into `zbuild.bat` file of root directory.

## Free Public Servers

Below are the servers you are using for free, it may change along the time. If you are not close to one of these, your network may be slow.
| Location | Vendor | Specification |
| --------- | ------------- | ------------------ |
| Seoul | AWS lightsail | 1 VCPU / 0.5GB RAM |
| Singapore | Vultr | 1 VCPU / 1GB RAM |
| Dallas | Vultr | 1 VCPU / 1GB RAM | |

## Dependencies

Desktop versions use [sciter](https://sciter.com/) for GUI, please download sciter dynamic library yourself.

[Windows](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/c-smile/sciter-sdk/master/bin.win/x64/sciter.dll) |
[Linux](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/c-smile/sciter-sdk/master/bin.lnx/x64/libsciter-gtk.so) |
[MacOS](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/c-smile/sciter-sdk/master/bin.osx/libsciter.dylib)

## Raw steps to build

- Prepare your Rust development env and C++ build env

- Install [vcpkg](https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg), and set `VCPKG_ROOT` env variable correctly

  - Windows: vcpkg install libvpx:x64-windows-static libyuv:x64-windows-static opus:x64-windows-static
  - Linux/MacOS: vcpkg install libvpx libyuv opus

- run `cargo run`

## How to build on Linux

### Ubuntu 18 (Debian 10)

```sh
sudo apt install -y g++ gcc git curl wget nasm yasm libgtk-3-dev clang libxcb-randr0-dev libxdo-dev libxfixes-dev libxcb-shape0-dev libxcb-xfixes0-dev libasound2-dev libpulse-dev cmake
```

### Fedora 28 (CentOS 8)

```sh
sudo yum -y install gcc-c++ git curl wget nasm yasm gcc gtk3-devel clang libxcb-devel libxdo-devel libXfixes-devel pulseaudio-libs-devel cmake alsa-lib-devel
```

### Arch (Manjaro)

```sh
sudo pacman -Syu --needed unzip git cmake gcc curl wget yasm nasm zip make pkg-config clang gtk3 xdotool libxcb libxfixes alsa-lib pulseaudio
```

### Install vcpkg

```sh
git clone https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg
cd vcpkg
git checkout 2021.12.01
cd ..
vcpkg/bootstrap-vcpkg.sh
export VCPKG_ROOT=$HOME/vcpkg
vcpkg/vcpkg install libvpx libyuv opus
```

### Fix libvpx (For Fedora)

```sh
cd vcpkg/buildtrees/libvpx/src
cd *
./configure
sed -i 's/CFLAGS+=-I/CFLAGS+=-fPIC -I/g' Makefile
sed -i 's/CXXFLAGS+=-I/CXXFLAGS+=-fPIC -I/g' Makefile
make
cp libvpx.a $HOME/vcpkg/installed/x64-linux/lib/
cd
```

### Build

```sh
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
source $HOME/.cargo/env
git clone https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk
cd rustdesk
mkdir -p target/debug
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/c-smile/sciter-sdk/master/bin.lnx/x64/libsciter-gtk.so
mv libsciter-gtk.so target/debug
VCPKG_ROOT=$HOME/vcpkg cargo run
```

### Change Wayland to X11 (Xorg)

RustDesk does not support Wayland. Check [this](https://docs.fedoraproject.org/en-US/quick-docs/configuring-xorg-as-default-gnome-session/) to configuring Xorg as the default GNOME session.

## How to build with Docker

Begin by cloning the repository and building the docker container:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk
cd rustdesk
docker build -t "rustdesk-builder" .
```

Then, each time you need to build the application, run the following command:

```sh
docker run --rm -it -v $PWD:/home/user/rustdesk -v rustdesk-git-cache:/home/user/.cargo/git -v rustdesk-registry-cache:/home/user/.cargo/registry -e PUID="$(id -u)" -e PGID="$(id -g)" rustdesk-builder
```

Note that the first build may take longer before dependencies are cached, subsequent builds will be faster. Additionally, if you need to specify different arguments to the build command, you may do so at the end of the command in the `<OPTIONAL-ARGS>` position. For instance, if you wanted to build an optimized release version, you would run the command above followed by `---release`. The resulting executable will be available in the target folder on your system, and can be run with:

```sh
target/debug/rustdesk
```

Or, if you're running a release executable:

```sh
target/release/rustdesk
```

Please ensure that you are running these commands from the root of the RustDesk repository, otherwise the application may be unable to find the required resources. Also note that other cargo subcommands such as `install` or `run` are not currently supported via this method as they would install or run the program inside the container instead of the host.

## File Structure

- **[libs/hbb_common](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/libs/hbb_common)**: video codec, config, tcp/udp wrapper, protobuf, fs functions for file transfer, and some other utility functions
- **[libs/scrap](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/libs/scrap)**: screen capture
- **[libs/enigo](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/libs/enigo)**: platform specific keyboard/mouse control
- **[src/ui](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/ui)**: GUI
- **[src/server](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/server)**: audio/clipboard/input/video services, and network connections
- **[src/client.rs](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/client.rs)**: start a peer connection
- **[src/rendezvous_mediator.rs](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/rendezvous_mediator.rs)**: Communicate with [rustdesk-server](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk-server), wait for remote direct (TCP hole punching) or relayed connection
- **[src/platform](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/platform)**: platform specific code

## Snapshot

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71636191/113112362-ae4deb80-923b-11eb-957d-ff88daad4f06.png)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71636191/113112619-f705a480-923b-11eb-911d-97e984ef52b6.png)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71636191/113112857-3fbd5d80-923c-11eb-9836-768325faf906.png)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71636191/135385039-38fdbd72-379a-422d-b97f-33df71fb1cec.png)

Commit message:

Update building guide for linux

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <img src="logo-header.svg" alt="RustDesk - Your remote desktop"><br>
  <a href="#free-public-servers">Servers</a> •
  <a href="#raw-steps-to-build">Build</a> •
  <a href="#how-to-build-with-docker">Docker</a> •
  <a href="#file-structure">Structure</a> •
  <a href="#snapshot">Snapshot</a><br>
  [<a href="README-ZH.md">中文</a>] | [<a href="README-ES.md">Español</a>] | [<a href="README-FR.md">Français</a>] | [<a href="README-DE.md">Deutsch</a>] | [<a href="README-PL.md">Polski</a>] | [<a href="README-FI.md">Suomi</a>] | [<a href="README-ML.md">മലയാളം</a>] | [<a href="README-JP.md">日本語</a>] | [<a href="README-NL.md">Nederlands</a>] | [<a href="README-IT.md">Italiano</a>] | [<a href="README-RU.md">Русский</a>] | [<a href="README-PTBR.md">Português (Brasil)</a>] | [<a href="README-EO.md">Esperanto</a>]<br>
  <b>We need your help to translate this README and <a href="https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/lang">RustDesk UI</a> to your native language</b>
</p>

Chat with us: [Discord](https://discord.gg/nDceKgxnkV) | [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/rustdesk)

[![ko-fi](https://ko-fi.com/img/githubbutton_sm.svg)](https://ko-fi.com/I2I04VU09)

Yet another remote desktop software, written in Rust. Works out of the box, no configuration required. You have full control of your data, with no concerns about security. You can use our rendezvous/relay server, [set up your own](https://rustdesk.com/server), or [write your own rendezvous/relay server](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk-server-demo).

RustDesk welcomes contribution from everyone. See [`CONTRIBUTING.md`](CONTRIBUTING.md) for help getting started.

[**BINARY DOWNLOAD**](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/releases)

## UI-inline Build

Currently, when using `cargo build` to create a binary of RustDesk, the `\src\ui\` folder must be in the same directory as the `rustdesk.exe` file.

Needed the feature packing `ui` folder into binary executable.
The `inline` feature was implemented originally.
The following is a way to build under inline mode.

1. Apply [these changes](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/pull/240). They were applied to `packui` branch of this repo already.
2. Download [sciter-sdk](https://github.com/c-smile/sciter-sdk.git) and append `bin` directory (one of `bin.win`, `bin.osx` or `bin.lnx`) to `PATH` environment variable. That directory contains `packfolder` executable.
3. Run this file: `src/makerc.bat`. All html/css/tis files will be packed into `src/resources.rc` file.
4. In case of MacOS:
  - Run `cargo install cargo-bundle` to install `cargo bundle`.
  - Fix some paths in build.py.
`libsciter.dylib` -> `src/libsciter.dylib`
`libsciter-gtk.so` -> `src/libsciter-gtk.so`
  - Run `brew install create-dmg`.
  - Add output filename to create-dmg parameters in `build.py`.
`os.system('create-dmg target/release/bundle/osx/RustDesk.app')` -> `os.system('create-dmg "RustDesk %s.dmg" target/release/bundle/osx/RustDesk.app'%version)`
5. In case of Linux:
  - Run `cargo install cargo-bundle` to install `cargo bundle`.
  - Run `sudo yum install dpkg` to install `dpkg`.
  - Run the following commands for executables in `DEBIAN` directory. They were applied to `packui` branch of this repo already.
```
chmod 775 preinst
chmod 775 prerm
chmod 775 postinst
chmod 775 postrm
```
6. Install python3 and run this command in project root directory: `python3 build.py`
7. In case of Windows:
  - The `RustsDesk.exe` will be built in `target/release` and it will be duplicated to `rustdesk-1.1.9-putes.exe` in root directory.
  - These files have its own icon, unlike debug executable.
8. In case of MacOS:
  - The `rustsdesk` executable will be built in `target/release` and `rustdesk-1.1.9.dmg` will be created in root directory.
9. In case of Linux:
  - The `rustsdesk` executable will be built in `target/release` and `rustdesk-1.1.9.deb` will be created in root directory.

Gathered all these commands into `zbuild.bat` file of root directory.

## Free Public Servers

Below are the servers you are using for free, it may change along the time. If you are not close to one of these, your network may be slow.
| Location | Vendor | Specification |
| --------- | ------------- | ------------------ |
| Seoul | AWS lightsail | 1 VCPU / 0.5GB RAM |
| Singapore | Vultr | 1 VCPU / 1GB RAM |
| Dallas | Vultr | 1 VCPU / 1GB RAM | |

## Dependencies

Desktop versions use [sciter](https://sciter.com/) for GUI, please download sciter dynamic library yourself.

[Windows](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/c-smile/sciter-sdk/master/bin.win/x64/sciter.dll) |
[Linux](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/c-smile/sciter-sdk/master/bin.lnx/x64/libsciter-gtk.so) |
[MacOS](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/c-smile/sciter-sdk/master/bin.osx/libsciter.dylib)

## Raw steps to build

- Prepare your Rust development env and C++ build env

- Install [vcpkg](https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg), and set `VCPKG_ROOT` env variable correctly

  - Windows: vcpkg install libvpx:x64-windows-static libyuv:x64-windows-static opus:x64-windows-static
  - Linux/MacOS: vcpkg install libvpx libyuv opus

- run `cargo run`

## How to build on Linux

### Ubuntu 18 (Debian 10)

```sh
sudo apt install -y g++ gcc git curl wget nasm yasm libgtk-3-dev clang libxcb-randr0-dev libxdo-dev libxfixes-dev libxcb-shape0-dev libxcb-xfixes0-dev libasound2-dev libpulse-dev cmake
```

### Fedora 28 (CentOS 8)

```sh
sudo yum -y install gcc-c++ git curl wget nasm yasm gcc gtk3-devel clang libxcb-devel libxdo-devel libXfixes-devel pulseaudio-libs-devel cmake alsa-lib-devel
```

### Arch (Manjaro)

```sh
sudo pacman -Syu --needed unzip git cmake gcc curl wget yasm nasm zip make pkg-config clang gtk3 xdotool libxcb libxfixes alsa-lib pulseaudio
```

### Install vcpkg

```sh
git clone https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg
cd vcpkg
git checkout 2021.12.01
cd ..
vcpkg/bootstrap-vcpkg.sh
export VCPKG_ROOT=$HOME/vcpkg
vcpkg/vcpkg install libvpx libyuv opus
```

### Fix libvpx (For Fedora)

```sh
cd vcpkg/buildtrees/libvpx/src
cd *
./configure
sed -i 's/CFLAGS+=-I/CFLAGS+=-fPIC -I/g' Makefile
sed -i 's/CXXFLAGS+=-I/CXXFLAGS+=-fPIC -I/g' Makefile
make
cp libvpx.a $HOME/vcpkg/installed/x64-linux/lib/
cd
```

### Build

```sh
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
source $HOME/.cargo/env
git clone https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk
cd rustdesk
mkdir -p target/debug
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/c-smile/sciter-sdk/master/bin.lnx/x64/libsciter-gtk.so
mv libsciter-gtk.so target/debug
VCPKG_ROOT=$HOME/vcpkg cargo run
```

### Change Wayland to X11 (Xorg)

RustDesk does not support Wayland. Check [this](https://docs.fedoraproject.org/en-US/quick-docs/configuring-xorg-as-default-gnome-session/) to configuring Xorg as the default GNOME session.

## How to build with Docker

Begin by cloning the repository and building the docker container:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk
cd rustdesk
docker build -t "rustdesk-builder" .
```

Then, each time you need to build the application, run the following command:

```sh
docker run --rm -it -v $PWD:/home/user/rustdesk -v rustdesk-git-cache:/home/user/.cargo/git -v rustdesk-registry-cache:/home/user/.cargo/registry -e PUID="$(id -u)" -e PGID="$(id -g)" rustdesk-builder
```

Note that the first build may take longer before dependencies are cached, subsequent builds will be faster. Additionally, if you need to specify different arguments to the build command, you may do so at the end of the command in the `<OPTIONAL-ARGS>` position. For instance, if you wanted to build an optimized release version, you would run the command above followed by `---release`. The resulting executable will be available in the target folder on your system, and can be run with:

```sh
target/debug/rustdesk
```

Or, if you're running a release executable:

```sh
target/release/rustdesk
```

Please ensure that you are running these commands from the root of the RustDesk repository, otherwise the application may be unable to find the required resources. Also note that other cargo subcommands such as `install` or `run` are not currently supported via this method as they would install or run the program inside the container instead of the host.

## File Structure

- **[libs/hbb_common](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/libs/hbb_common)**: video codec, config, tcp/udp wrapper, protobuf, fs functions for file transfer, and some other utility functions
- **[libs/scrap](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/libs/scrap)**: screen capture
- **[libs/enigo](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/libs/enigo)**: platform specific keyboard/mouse control
- **[src/ui](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/ui)**: GUI
- **[src/server](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/server)**: audio/clipboard/input/video services, and network connections
- **[src/client.rs](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/client.rs)**: start a peer connection
- **[src/rendezvous_mediator.rs](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/rendezvous_mediator.rs)**: Communicate with [rustdesk-server](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk-server), wait for remote direct (TCP hole punching) or relayed connection
- **[src/platform](https://github.com/rustdesk/rustdesk/tree/master/src/platform)**: platform specific code

## Snapshot

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71636191/113112362-ae4deb80-923b-11eb-957d-ff88daad4f06.png)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71636191/113112619-f705a480-923b-11eb-911d-97e984ef52b6.png)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71636191/113112857-3fbd5d80-923c-11eb-9836-768325faf906.png)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71636191/135385039-38fdbd72-379a-422d-b97f-33df71fb1cec.png)
